# Thoughts on Buying a Home in hot DMV Market

This is a loose collection of thoughts that I have after buying a home in this hot DMV market. Many of these point likely apply many other metropolitan or growing areas. This is based solely on my experience and may differ depending on where you live, when you buy, what you are looking for, and what your budget is. This is not financial advise but may be helpful for potential buyers in hot market areas. These items are listed in no particular order.

 1. (and that's a big one) Do not get emotionally attached. We had some great homes that we loved but we got outbid on. It was hard to let go but it was necessary to go on with the next one.
 2. Set a clear financial boundary. This is especially important when buying with a partner. You should be on the same page, even more so in this fast-paced market, so you can make a fast decision. Probably best not to use the full amount that your lender allows for in the pre-approval.
 3. Shop for multiple lenders. Some are slimy and try to guilt-trip you when you tell them that you have a better offer, but definitely worth it. We also had good experiences though. We told one of our lenders that he was not our best offer and he referred us to a friend who could make an even better offer than what we had.
 4. Don't (necessarily) go with a lender that your realtor pushes
 5. Don't rely on your realtor too much (you will need to go through them to purchase the home, though, after you sign a contract with them)
 6. Standard and "boring" is usually not as overpriced as custom and exciting
 7. If you have friends with experience (e.g. architects), ask them to come to some of the showings.
 8. You will have to make a fast decision and will likely have to waive all contingencies - only place an offer if you are 100% behind it. You might still get outbid by buyers who pay cash and/or a lot more.
 9. Fully understand the implications of your offer. E.g. if you guarantee the offer price (or a certain amount above it), the bank will only give you financing for the appraised value. You would have to pay the difference up front out of pocket (or come to some other agreement with seller). Don't over-commit here.
 10. Do your research and find good comparables to estimate the value of the home. You should be confident that your estimate will be somewhere close to the appraisal. Pay more than this estimate if you think it will be competitive, but keep in mind that any money you pay above appraisal is basically a "loss" (financially; if it means that you will get your dream house, it may be worth it) because it does not build equity. Know how much money you can "throw away" to get your dream house.
 11. You will likely pay more than asking price. We got outbid when we offered to pay $50k, $65k, $100k over asking because the homes were custom and exciting. We saw a home go for almost $300k over asking because it was so beautiful and very unique. In the end, we paid exactly asking price for the home we got because it was standard and "boring" but ticked (almost) all the boxes that we were looking for.
 12. The asking price does not reflect the appraised value. The seller may ask 
       - a low price to create more competition and get more offers, 
       - a high price because they feel that someone will pay it, or 
       - for what they think would be the appraised value. 

     It is your homework to find good comparables and determine an estimate for the actual/appraised value.
 13. Make sure that you use all benefits if there are any. My wife is a military veteran and we can use VA loan, which means no down payment and usually a lower interest rate. I don't know what other benefits there are for non-military/conventional loans but there might be a huge opportunity to save money.
 14. With low interest rates, 30-year term is usually the better decision (but I am no financial expert). We refinanced our town-home last year and opted for 15-year because the overall cost of the loan is cheaper and we will own the home after 15 years, but we'd probably be better off to just pay the lower monthly payments of a 30-year loan and invest the difference instead. It will also make things easier in case of unexpected financial hardship.
 15. Make a list of requirements and rank priorities ahead of time. This will make it easier to find a satisfactory compromise if not all items can be met with the budget at hand.
