# Kotlin Extension Function Resolution: Generics and Star Projection

[Kotlin extension functions and properties](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/extensions.html) are a powerful tool to extend types. Extension functions/properties are syntactic sugar that can be used like member functions and properties of the extended types, aka the receiver. They are [resolved statically](classes and interfaces) at compile time based on the declared type of a variable. This is different from dynamic dispatch of virtual functions in the JVM: the function resolution is determined by the actual type of an object at runtime, not the declared type. This knowledge will prepare against most pitfalls or unexpected behavior of Kotlin extension functions. Despite this knowledge, I spent a lot of time debugging extension function resolution with generics and star projection.

## Extension Functions with Generics and Star Projection

In the [nta.kt](https://github.com/saalfeldlab/ntakt) library, I utilize extension functions to provide an improved experience for ImgLib2 users in Kotlin. Many of those extensions use generic paremeters or star projection, in some cases both. My incorrect intuition was that Kotlin would always resolve a generic function over star projection parameters. It took me ages to figure out that this is not true. I was able to reproduce the behavior as a minimum working example (MWE) using only standard Kotlin without any ImgLib2 dependencies.

### Minimum Working Example

First, I define some helper interfaces and classes:
 1. We need a `Base` interface,
    ```kotlin
    interface Base
    ```
 2. a second interface `Derived` that is derived from `Base`, 
    ```kotlin
    interface Derived : Base
    ```
 3. a class `Impl` that implements the `Derived` interface, and
    ```kotlin
    class Impl: Derived
    ```
 4. a class `Container<T>` that has a generic parameter
    ```kotlin
    data class Container<T>(val t: T)
    ```
    
Next, I instantiate an object of type `Container<Impl>`:
```kotlin
val c = Container(Impl())
```

Then, I define an extension function for `Container`
 1. with generic bounds, and
    ```kotlin
    @JvmName("f1")
    fun <T: Base> Container<T>.someFunc(c: Container<T>) = println("generic: $c")
    ```
 2. with star projection
    ```kotlin
    @JvmName("f2")
    fun Container<out Derived>.someFunc(c: Container<out Derived>) = println("star projection: $c")
    ```

Note that [`JvmName` disambiguates the function name in case ofJVM signature clashes])(https://kotlinlang.org/docs/java-to-kotlin-interop.html#handling-signature-clashes-with-jvmname).

We can now call the function `someFunc` on our `Container` object `c`:
```kotlin
c.someFunc(c)
```
The unexpected output, at least for me, is:
```
star projection: Container(t=Impl@31cefde0)
```
I.e. Kotlin resolves the function with star projection, contrary to my intuition that the same function name with generic bounds would have been a better match. After hours of debugging, I realized that the star projection is more specific (`Derived`) than the generic bound (`Base`). Without any other avenues to explore, I updated the function definitions:
```kotlin
@JvmName("g1")
fun <T: Derived> Container<T>.someOtherFunc(c: Container<T>) = println("generic: $c")
@JvmName("g2")
fun Container<out Derived>.someOtherFunc(c: Container<out Derived>) = println("star projection: $c")
```
Calling the new function
```kotlin
c.someOtherFunc(c)
```
now produces the expected output
```
generic: Container(t=Impl@31cefde0)
```

(ﾉ◕ヮ◕)ﾉ*:･ﾟ✧

My (unconfirmed) conclusion is that Kotlin picks the most specific overload if there are multiple matching signatures with generic or star projection bounds. If generics and star projection have the same bounds, Kotlin will pick the generic method. I will start a thread on the [Kotlin Discussions board](https://discuss.kotlinlang.org/) for clarification.

This is the complete MWE (also [available in the Kotlin playground](https://pl.kotl.in/qlSNa-EqH)):
```kotlin
interface Base
interface Derived : Base
class Impl: Derived
data class Container<T>(val t: T)

@JvmName("f1")
fun <T: Base> Container<T>.someFunc(c: Container<T>) = println("generic: $c")
@JvmName("f2")
fun Container<out Derived>.someFunc(c: Container<out Derived>) = println("star projection: $c")

@JvmName("g1")
fun <T: Derived> Container<T>.someOtherFunc(c: Container<T>) = println("generic: $c")
@JvmName("g2")
fun Container<out Derived>.someOtherFunc(c: Container<out Derived>) = println("star projection: $c")

fun main() {
    val c = Container(Impl())
    c.someFunc(c)
    c.someOtherFunc(c)
}
```
